Right to Equality (Article 18) - All citizens are equal before the law. No discrimination based on religion, race, caste, tribe, gender, economic condition, language, region, ideology or any other grounds shall be allowed. Equal pay must be given for equal work.
Right to Freedom (Article 17) - Citizens have the freedom of opinion and expression, peaceful assembly, movement, choice of profession, privacy, and protection of one's reputation and personal records.
Rights Regarding Education (Article 31) - Every citizen has the right to free and compulsory education up to the basic level, free education up to the secondary level, and education in one's mother tongue.
Right to Health (Article 35) - Everybody has the right to free basic health services and emergency health services.
Right to Justice (Article 20) - Citizens have the right to fair trial, legal representation, constitutional remedy, be informed of charges, and access to an independent and impartial court.
Right to Life and Dignity (Article 16) - Every person has the right to live a life of respect. No one can be subjected to torture, inhuman treatment, or death penalty.
Right Against Untouchability and Discrimination (Article 24) - Untouchability and discrimination on the basis of caste is prohibited.
Right to Information (Article 27) - Citizens have the right to seek and receive information from public bodies, except where restricted by law.
Right to Communication (Article 19) - Each citizen has the freedom to print, broadcast, publish or disseminate information through any media.
Right to Freedom of Religion (Article 26) - Everybody has the freedom to profess, practice and protect one's religion according to tradition though no forceful conversion is allowed.
Right to Employment (Article 33 and 34) - All citizens have the right to employment and labor rights including fair wages, healthy work environment, and social security.
Right to Food (Article 36) - Everyone has the right to access adequate and quality food.
Right to Housing (Article 37) - Each person has the right to appropriate housing and cannot be evicted from the residence they own.
Rights of Women (Article 38) - Women have equal rights to lineage, and participation in state mechanisms. They have rights to safe motherhood and reproductive health, protection against violence, and special opportunities to health, employment and social security.
Rights of Children (Article 39) - Children have the rights to name and birth registration, education, healthcare, proper upbringing, and protection from exploitation.
Rights of Dalits (Article 40) - Dalits have special protection and affirmative action to end discrimination and promote social justice.
Rights of Senior Citizens, Disabled Persons & Minorities (Article 41, 42, 43) - They have rights to protection, dignity, social security, and participation in public life.
Right Against Preventive Detention (Article 23) - No one can be detained without legal grounds. Unlawful arrest or detention is prohibited.
Right Against Exploitation (Article 29) - No forced labor, human trafficking, slavery, or child labor is allowed.
Right to Clean Environment (Article 30) - Citizens have the right to live in a clean and healthy environment.